
Techniques for simulating the behavior of elastic objects has matured
considerably over the last several decades, tackling diverse problems
from non-linear models for incompressibility to accurate
self-collisions. Alongside these contributions, advances in parallel
hardware design and algorithms have made simulation more efficient and
affordable than ever before. However, prior research has commonly made
the choice to sacrifice one aspect of simulation for another,
resulting in a fragmented landscape of solutions. For complex,
real-world tasks, such as virtual surgery, a holistic approach is
desirable, where complex behavior, performance, and ease of modeling
are supported equally. This dissertation aims to provide that in the
form of several interconnected investigations, each of which
contribute a piece of an unified solution. First, it will be
demonstrated how advanced non-linear materials can be combined with
lattice deformers yield simulations with behavioral richness and a
high potential for parallelism. This potential will be exploited to
show how a hybrid solver approach based on large macroblocks can
accelerate the convergence of these deformers. Extending the lattice
concept with non-manifold topology allows for efficient processing of
self-collisions and topology change. Finally, a case study on virtual
plastic surgery will demonstrate a real-world problem space where
these ideas can be combined to build an expressive authoring tool,
allowing surgeons to record procedures digitally for future reference
or education.


%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "../dissertation"
%%% End:
